Qurator docs (#4159)
quiltdata/quilt: docs/advanced-features/qurator.md

# Qurator Omni Beta

`Qurator Omni` is an always-available AI assistant embedded directly into the
Quilt web catalog. It allows users to interact with Quilt packages and search
functionality through natural language. Qurator Omni leverages advanced models

> like Claude, integrated via AWS Bedrock, enabling users to query, retrieve, and

Reviewer: Amazon Bedrock

or learning complicated search syntax, users can opt into the Qurator feature to
ask complex questions in plain language and receive structured, actionable
responses.

For example, users can ask for summaries of research on topics like "melanoma"
or request key insights from a specific dataset.

### Key Features

- **Natural Language Queries**: Ask complex questions like “What are the latest
  asthma treatments?” or “Summarize research on BRCA1 mutations.”
- **Instant Summaries**: Quickly digest scientific papers, datasets, or reports
  without reading everything.
- **Fine-Grained Permissions with RAG**: Query only the data you're authorized
  to access, ensuring compliance with strict organizational policies
- **Secure Cloud Environment**: Work within your private AWS cloud, ensuring
  data stays secure while using state-of-the-art AI models.

## Getting Started

To enable Qurator Omni:

1. **Opt-In to Qurator**:  
   - Install Release 1.55 or later of the Quilt Platform CloudFormation template.
   - Set the `qurator` parameter to `true` in the CloudFormation template to
     enable the Qurator chatbot.

2. **Configure Claude Model**:  

>    - Login to the AWS Bedrock console.

Reviewer: Amazon Bedrock

     for details.
   - Enable the model by configuring it within your Bedrock environment.
   - Carefully monitor the model’s cost implications. The Claude model is
     charged based on usage, so ensure that you have the necessary budget
     allocated. Initial estimates are roughly a penny per page for complex documents,

3. **Start Using Qurator**:  
   - Once activated, the Qurator chatbot will appear in the Quilt web catalog
     interface.
   - Click the Qurator icon on the
     bottom right of the screen to open the chat interface. ![qurator icon](../imgs/qurator-icon.png)
   - You can begin by typing questions into the chat interface. For example,
     queries like _“What are the key findings on small molecule delivery?”_ will
     prompt Qurator to retrieve relevant packages and present a summarized
     overview.

### Example Use Cases

- **Search**: _“What are the latest papers on melanoma?”_  
  Qurator will search through the Quilt packages and retrieve the most relevant
  data.
  
- **Summarize**: _“Summarize the key points of this BRCA1 research.”_  
  After selecting a specific document, Qurator will generate a clear, useful
  summary of the paper.

> - **Deep Dive**: _“Who are the top authors in breast cancer research?”_  

Reviewer 2: that's not going to work, bc it needs to actually read all the contents of all the papers to do that

Author: Is that the only error? 😁 

Could we change that to:
```suggestion
- **Quick Scan**: _“List some of the authors doing breast cancer research?”_  
```

Reviewer 2: maybe, but even this won't work nicely, bc those plaintext files don't have any metadata exposed,
so in order to tell anything, the assistant has to request contents of each of the files.
i can try exposing the contents we have in the search index tho -- maybe it will get us halfway thru.

Reviewer 2: okay this is working now, but it only summarizes the first 30 search results (out of, well, 800k+), and the contents given to the llm are truncated to 10k chars per document to make them fit into the context window
